<h1>&#x1F6B2; fixi</h1> 

fixi is an experimental, minimalist implementation
of [generalized hypermedia controls](https://dl.acm.org/doi/fullHtml/10.1145/3648188.3675127):

```html

<button fx-action="/content" fx-method="get" fx-target="#output" fx-swap="innerHTML">
    Get Content
</button>
<output id="output"></output>
```

This button will issue a `GET` request to the `/content` relative URL and place the HTML returned by that request inside
the output tag below it.

fixi is [scheme](https://scheme.org/) to [htmx](https://htmx.org)'s [common lisp](https://lisp-lang.org/): it is 
designed to be as simple as possible while still being useful for real world projects.

This means it does not have many of the features found in htmx, including:

* [request queueing & synchronization](https://htmx.org/attributes/hx-sync/)
* [extended selector support](https://htmx.org/docs/#extended-css-selectors)
* [extended event support](https://htmx.org/docs/#special-events)
* [attribute inheritance](https://htmx.org/docs/#inheritance)
* [request indicators](https://htmx.org/docs/#indicators)
* [CSS transitions](https://htmx.org/docs/#css_transitions)
* [history support](https://htmx.org/docs/#history)

fixi takes advantage of some modern JavaScript features not used by htmx:

* [`async` functions](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/async_function)
* the [`fetch()` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API)
* the use of [`MutationObserver`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/MutationObserver) for monitoring when new content is added
* The [View Transition API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/View_Transition_API) (used by htmx, but the
  sole mechanism for transitions in fixi)

## Minimalism

fixi is in part an experiment in [software minimalism](https://ia601608.us.archive.org/8/items/pdfy-PeRDID4QHBNfcH7s/LeanSoftware_text.pdf).

A goal of the project is to keep the uncompressed, unminified library size under that of
the [preact](https://bundlephobia.com/package/preact) project, when preact is minified & compressed (currently 4.6Kb).

The current uncompressed size is `3408` bytes and the gzip'd size is `1318` bytes as determined by:

```bash
ls -l fixi.js | awk  '{print "raw:", $5}'; gzip -k fixi.js; ls -l fixi.js.gz | awk  '{print "gzipped:", $5}'; rm fixi.js.gz 
```

Another design goal is that user should be able to use fixi unminified in order to make debugging as simple as possible.

The code style is dense, but the statements are structured for debugging.

Like a fixed-gear bike, fixi has very few moving parts:

* No dependencies (including the test suite, which is a self-contained testing system)
* No JavaScript API (beyond the events)
* No `fixi.min.js` file
* No `package.json`
* No build step

The fixi project consists of three files:

* `fixi.js`, the code for the library
* `test.html`, the test suite for the library
* This `README.md`, which is the documentation

Note that `test.html` is a stand-alone HTML file that implements its own visual testing infrastructure, mocking for 
`fetch()`, etc. and that can be opened using the `file:` protocol for easy testing.

## Installing

fixi is intended to be [vendored](https://macwright.com/2021/03/11/vendor-by-default), that is copied, into your 
project:

```bash
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bigskysoftware/fixi/refs/tags/0.0.6/fixi.js >> fixi-0.0.6.js
```

The SHA256 of v0.0.6 is 

`EHtFYCYl6clUqaZidfXnTFd0FPTJbZ/gq4Hen3PbYvE=`

generated by the following command line script:

```bash
cat fixi.js | openssl sha256 -binary | openssl base64
```

You can also use the JSDelivr CDN for local development or testing:

```html

<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/bigskysoftware/fixi@0.0.5/fixi.js"
        integrity="sha256-EHtFYCYl6clUqaZidfXnTFd0FPTJbZ/gq4Hen3PbYvE="></script>
```

fixi is not distributed via [NPM](https://www.npmjs.com/).

## API

The fixi api consists of six attributes & six events.

### Attributes

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
  <th>attribute</th>
  <th>description</th>
  <th>example</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
  <td>
    <code>fx&#8209;action</code>
  </td>
  <td>
    The URL to which an HTTP request will be issued, required
  </td>
  <td>
    <code>fx&#8209;action='/demo'</code>
  </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>fx&#8209;method</code></td>
<td>The HTTP Method that will be used for the request (case&#8209;insensitive), defaults to <code>GET</code></td>
<td><code>fx&#8209;method=&#39;DELETE&#39;</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>fx&#8209;target</code></td>
<td>A CSS selector specifying where to place the response HTML in the DOM, defaults to the current element</td>
<td><code>fx&#8209;target=&#39;#a&#8209;div&#39;</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>fx&#8209;swap</code></td>
<td>A string specifying how the content should be swapped into the DOM, one of <code>innerHTML</code>, <code>outerHTML</code>, <code>beforestart</code>, <code>afterstart</code>, <code>beforeend</code> or <code>afterend</code>.  <code>outerHTML</code> is the default.</td>
<td><code>fx&#8209;swap=&#39;innerHTML&#39;</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>fx&#8209;trigger</code></td>
<td>The event that will trigger a request.  Defaults to <code>submit</code> for <code>form</code> elements, <code>change</code> for <code>input</code>&#8209;like elements & <code>click</code> for all other elements</td>
<td><code>fx&#8209;trigger=&#39;click&#39;</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>fx&#8209;ignore</code></td>
<td>Any element with this attribute on it or on a parent will not be processed for <code>fx&#8209;*</code> attributes</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

#### Mechanism

fixi works in a straight-forward manner and I encourage you to look at [the source](fixi.js). 

##### Processing

The main entry point is found at the bottom of the file: on the `DOMContentLoaded` event fixi does two things:

* It establishes a MutationObserver to watch for newly added content
* It processes any existing fixi-powered elements

fixi-powered elements are elements with the `fx-action` attribute on them.  fixi will ignore any elements that have the
`fx-ignore` attribute on them or on a parent.

##### Requests

When fixi finds one it will establish an event listener on that element that will dispatch an AJAX request via `fetch()` to
the URL specified by `fx-action`.  

The event that will trigger the request is determined by the `fx-trigger` attribute.  If that attribute is not present,
the trigger defaults to `submit` for `form` elements, `change` for `input`, `select` & `textarea` elements, and 
`click` for everything else.

The [HTTP method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Methods) of the request will be determined by the 
`fx-method` attribute.  If this attribute is not present, it will default to `GET`.  This attribute is case-insensitive.

fixi sends the [request header](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers) `FX-Request`, with the value 
`true`.  You can add or remove headers using the `evt.detail.cfg.headers` object, see the `fx:before` event below.

If an element is within a form element or has a `form` attribute, the values of that form will be included with the
request.  Otherwise, if the element has a `name`, it's `name` & `value` will be sent with the request.   You can add or 
remove values using the `evt.detail.cfg.form` `FormData` object in the `fx:before` event.

`GET` & `DELETE` requests will include values via query parameters, other request types will submit them as a form
encoded body.

Before a request is sent, the aforementioned `fx:before` event is triggered, which can be used to configure aspects of
the request.  If `preventDefault()` is invoked, the request will not be sent.  The `evt.detail.cfg.drop` property will
be set to `true` if there is an existing outstanding request and, if it is not set to `false`, the request will be 
dropped.

##### Swapping

When fixi receives a response it triggers the `fx:after` event with the `response` and `text` values stored in the
`evt.detail.cfg` object.  These can be inspected, and the `text` value can be updated if you want to transform it.

fixi then swaps the response text into the DOM using the mechanism specified by `fx-swap`, targeting the element specified
by `fx-target`.  If the `hx-swap` attribute is not present, fixi will use `outerHTML`.  If the `fx-target` attribute 
is not present, it will target the element making the request.  

The swap mechanism and target can be changed in the request-related fixi events.

You can implement a custom swapping mechanism by setting a function in the `evt.detail.cfg.swap` property in one of
the request related events.  This function should take two arguments: the target element and the text to swap.

By default, swapping will occur in a [View Transition](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/View_Transition_API)
if they are available.  If you don't want this to occur, you can set the `evt.detail.cfg.transition` property to false
in one of the request-related events.

#### Example

Here is an example using all the attributes available in fixi:

```html

<button fx-action="/demo" fx-method="GET" 
        fx-target="#output" fx-swap="innerHTML" 
        fx-trigger="click">
    Get Content
</button>
<output id="output" fx-ignore>--</output>
```

In this example, the button will issue a `GET` request to `/demo` and put the resulting HTML into the `innerHTML` of the
output element with the id `output`.

Because the `output` element is marked as `fx-ignore`, any `fx-action` attributes in the new content will be ignored.

### Events

fixi fires the following events, broken into two categories:

* Initialization related
    * `fx:init` - triggered on elements that have a `fx-action` attribute and are about to be initialized by fixi
    * `fx:process` - triggered on new content added to the DOM that is not filtered via the `fx-ignore` attribute
* `fetch()` related
    * `fx:before` - triggered on an element before a `fetch()` request is made
    * `fx:after` - triggered on an element after a `fetch()` finishes normally but before content is swapped
    * `fx:error` - triggered on an element if an exception occurs during a `fetch()`
    * `fx:finally` - triggered after a request no matter what

#### Initialization Events

##### `fx:init`

The `fx:init` event is triggered when fixi is processing a node with an `fx-action` attribute. One property
is available in `evt.detail`:

* `options` - An [Options Object](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/EventTarget/addEventListener#options)
              that will be passed to `addEventListener()`

If this event is cancelled via `preventDefault()`, the element will not be initialized by fixi.

*Note: fixi will store the generated event listener in the `__fixi` property on the element.  To clear the behavior 
on an element you may use the following code:

```js
  elt.removeEventListener(elt.__fixi.evt, elt.__fixi)
```

##### `fx:process`

The `fx:process` event is triggered when fixi is sees new content added to the DOM that is not marked as `fx-ignore` or
the child of a node marked as `fx-ignore`. 

If it is cancelled via `preventDefault()`, neither the element nor any of its children will not be initialized by fixi.

#### `fetch()` Events

fixi uses the [`fetch()` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) to issue HTTP requests. It
triggers events around this call that allow users to configure the request.

##### `fx:before`

The first event triggered is `fx:before`. This event can be used to configure the arguments passed to `fetch()` via the
fixi config object, which can be found at `evt.detail.cfg`.

This config object has the following properties:

* `trigger` - The event that triggered the request
* `method` - The HTTP Method that is going to be used
* `action` - The URL that the request is going to be issued to
* `headers` - An Object of name/value pairs to be sent as HTTP Request Headers
* `target` - The target element that will be swapped when the response is processed
* `swap` - The mechanism by which the element will be swapped
* `body` - The body of the request, if present, a FormData object that holds the data of the form associated with the
* `drop` - Whether this request will be dropped, defaults to `true` if a request is already in flight
* `transition` - Whether to use the View Transition API for swaps, defaults to `true`
* `preventTriggerDefault` - A boolean (defaults to true) that, if true, will call `preventDefault()` on the triggering
  event
* `signal` - The AbortSignal of the related AbortController for the request
* `abort()` - A function that can be invoked to abort the pending fetch request

Mutating the `method`, etc. properties of the `cfg` object will change the behavior of the request dynamically. Note
that the `cfg` object is passed to `fetch()` as the second argument of type `RequestInit`, so any properties you want
to set on the `RequestInit` may be set on the `cfg` object (e.g. `credentials`).

You can also set a property on the config, `confirm`, that should be a no-argument function. This function should return
a Promise and can be used to asynchronously confirm that the request should be issued:

```js
function showAsynConfirmDialog() {
    //... a Promise-based confirmation dialog...
}

document.addEventListener("fx:before", (evt) => {
    evt.detail.cfg.confirm = showAsynConfirmDialog;
})
```

Another property available on the `detail` of this event is `requests`, which will be an array of any existing
outstanding requests for the element.

fixi does not implement request queuing like htmx does, but you can implement a simple
"replace existing requests in flight" rule with the following JavaScript:

```js
document.addEventListener("fx:before", (evt) => {
    evt.detail.cfg.drop = false;                       // allow this request to be issued
    evt.detail.requests.forEach((cfg) => cfg.abort()); // abort all existing requests
})
```

If you call `preventDefault()` on this event, no request will be issued.

##### `fx:after`

The  `fx:after` event is triggered after a `fetch()` successfully completes. The config will again be available in the
`evt.detail.cfg` property, and will have two additional properties:

* `response` - The response object from the `fetch()` call
* `text` - The text of the response

At this point you may still mutate the `swap`, etc. attributes to affect swapping, and you may mutate the `text` if you
want to modify it is some way before it is swapped.

Calling `preventDefault()` on this event will prevent swapping from occurring.

##### `fx:error`

The  `fx:error` event is triggered when a network error occurs. In this case the `cfg.txt` will be set to a blank
string, and the `evt.detail.cfg` object is available for modification.

Calling `preventDefault()` on this event will prevent swapping from occurring. Note that `AbortError`s will also prevent
swapping.

##### `fx:finally`

The  `fx:finally` event is triggered regardless if an error occurs or not and can be used to clean up after a request.
Again the `evt.detail.cfg` object is available for modification.

## Examples

Because fixi is minimalistic, the user is responsible for implementing many behaviors they want via events. We have
already seen how to abort an existing request that is already in flight.

Here are some additional examples of useful behaviors implemented using events:

### Disabling an Element During A Request

Here is an example that will use attributes to disable an element when a request is in flight:

```js
function maybeDisable(elt, disabled) {
    if (elt.hasAttribute('ext-disable')) {
        var disableTarget = elt.getAttribute('ext-disable');
        if (disableTarget === '') {
            elt.disabled = disabled;
        } else {
            document.querySelector(disableTarget).disabled = disabled;
        }
    }
}

document.addEventListener("fx:before", (evt) => {
    maybeDisable(evt.target, true);
})
document.addEventListener("fx:finally", (evt) => {
    maybeDisable(evt.target, false);
})
```

### Showing an Indicator During A Request

Here is an example that will use attributes and the `display` property to show an indicator element when a request is
in flight:

```js
function handleIndicator(elt, show) {
    if (elt.hasAttribute('ext-indicator')) {
        var indicator = elt.getAttribute('ext-indicator');
        document.querySelector(indicator).style.display = show ? 'initial' : 'none';
    }
}

document.addEventListener("fx:before", (evt) => {
    handleIndicator(evt.target, true);
})
document.addEventListener("fx:finally", (evt) => {
    handleIndicator(evt.target, false);
})
```

This example can be modified to use classes or other mechanisms for showing indicators as well.

### Debouncing A Request

Here is an implementation of the Active Search example from htmx done in fixi:

```html
<script>
  /**
   * Debounces the debouncedEvent for the given delay, emitting a triggeredEvent if
   * no new occurrences of the debounced event occur in the given delay interval, and
   * resetting the delay if so
   * 
   * @param elt - the elt to listen for the `debouncedEvent` on
   * @param debouncedEvent - the event type to debounce
   * @param triggeredEvent - the event to trigger when the interval `delay` has eclipsed and no new events to debounce have occurred
   * @param delay - the interval to wait for a new debouncedEvent before emitting a triggeredEvent
   */
  function debounce(elt, debouncedEvent, triggeredEvent, delay) {
    let currentTimeout = null;
    elt.addEventListener(debouncedEvent, () => {
      if (currentTimeout != null) {
        clearTimeout(currentTimeout);
      }
      currentTimeout = setTimeout(() => {
        element.dispatchEvent(new CustomEvent(triggeredEvent))
        currentTimeout = null;
      }, delay);
    })
  }

  document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", () => {
    let element = document.querySelector("#search");
    element.addEventListener('search', () => element.dispatchEvent(new CustomEvent('doSearch')));
    debounce(element, 'input', 'doSearch', 200);
  })
</script>
<input id="search" type="search" fx-action="/search" fx-trigger="doSearch" fx-target="#results" fx-swap="innerHTML"/>
<table>
    ...
    <tbody id="results">
    ...
    </tbody>
</table>
```

## LICENCE

```
Zero-Clause BSD
=============

Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for
any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS IS” AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL
WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES
OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE
FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY
DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN
AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT
OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
```

<h2>&#x1f480; <i>Memento mori</i></h2>

```js
/**
* Adding a single line to this file requires great internal reflection
* and thought.  You must ask yourself if your one line addition is so
* important, so critical to the success of the company, that it warrants
* a slowdown for every user on every page load.  Adding a single letter
* here could cost thousands of man hours around the world.
* 
* That is all.
*/
```

- [A comment](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wHlyLEPtL9o&t=1528s) at the beginning of [Primer](https://gist.github.com/makinde/376039)
